\input texinfo
@c %** start of header
@setfilename e-monotone.info
@settitle emacs monotone interface
@c %** end of header
@copying
An emacs front end for monotone, largely inspired on pcl-cvs.
This document describes version 0.4

Copyright @copyright{} 2005 W. R. Oudshoorn
@end copying

@titlepage
@title e-monotone
@subtitle A pcl-cvs like interface to monotone
@author Willem Rein Oudshoorn

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top emacs monotone interface
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::
* Installation::
* Using e-monotone::
* Advanced Uses::
* Revision diagrams::
* BUGS::
* TODO::
@end menu

@node Introduction, Installation, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction

This package is a simple emacs interface to monotone. 
In its use it is somewhat similar to the pcl-cvs front end for CVS.
However pcl-cvs is a mature package and this one is not, so
expect a lot of rough edges, bugs and not a lot of advanced features.

For people who do not know pcl-cvs, this mode will allow you to manage
an existing monotone project.  It will 

@itemize @bullet
@item 
Show a listing of all the files in the project, including their state.
@item
Allow you to show a diff of an edited file against the repository
@item
Allow you to commit the whole tree and specify a commit message.
@item
Allow to undo file changes, revert the file to version in the monotone database
@item
Add and Drop files.
@end itemize

@noindent What it will not do yet, but is desirable for the future

@itemize @bullet
@item
Branching, allow to switch to a different branch.
@item
Synchronization, synchronize your changes with another database
@item
Merging
@end itemize

@noindent What I do not envision this mode to do is

@itemize @bullet
@item 
Create a new project
@item
Checkout a new project
@item
etcetera
@end itemize

@noindent Although, it might be added a la gnus's server configuration.

@node Installation, Using e-monotone, Introduction, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Installation

Installation is pretty straightforward, copy the elisp files,
@file{e-monotone.el}, @file{e-monotone-a.el}, @file{e-monotone-wami.el},
@file{e-monotone-certs.el} and @file{e-monotone-graphs.el} to
a location in the emacs load path, and put the following in your @file{.emacs} file

@lisp
(load "e-monotone.el")
@end lisp

If emacs complains during startup that it can not fine @file{e-monotone-a.el} 
or any other e-monotone file, the files are not installed the emacs load path.
The load path can be changed with

@lisp
(add-to-list 'load-path (expand-file-name "/path/to/e-monotone"))
@end lisp

@section Compatibility

At the moment it is only tested with monotone version 0.23.  It uses 
only a few monotone commands, but these includes @code{automate inventory}
and @code{automate heads}.  So if the output format is changed it probably
will not work.  Also for performance reasons, it will use @code{db execute} 
to get all the certificates.  This does not work with version 0.26 because
the database has changed.  Most things will still work, but most noticably, the
graph drawing is not as nice with version 0.26.

@section Configuration

Emacs need to be able to find the @command{monotone} executable.  Default it tries
to find an executable with the name @command{monotone} or @command{mtn}
in the @env{PATH}.  If this does not work you can tell emacs which executables to use by putting

@lisp
(setq monotone-configuration '(("MT" "/path/and/monotone-executable-pre-0.26-name" t)
                               ("_MTN" "/path/and/monotone-executable-0.26-or-higher" nil)))
@end lisp

in your @file{.emacs} file.
If you are on windows, you can use dos style paths but don't forgot to quote the slash.  
So a path should look like @code{f:\\path\\monotone.exe"}.

Similar for viewing the graphs in emacs you might want to set the path
to the @command{dot} executable.   If @command{dot} is not found add

@lisp
(setq dot-cmd "/path/and/dot-executable-name")
@end lisp

The @command{dot} program is part of graphviz and is used
to convert graphs pictures.  
The @command{dot} program needs to be able to convert to
@file{.png} files.

@node Using e-monotone, Advanced Uses, Installation, Top
@chapter Using e-monotone


@section The main window

The first thing to do is to have a monotone project.  Now lets assume
this project lives in the directory @file{~/src/em}.  
Now to start the e-monotone you use the command
@kbd{M-x monotone-examine}.  This will prompt for a directory in 
the usual emacs way.  So just supply the directory above, @file{~/src/em}
and you end up with a screen that roughly looks like:

@cartouche
@example
@b{directory} ~/src/em
@b{revision}  3f70e5cd7cee3b080767aa447354dcb16bcff2ef
@b{heads}     3f70e5cd7cee3b080767aa447354dcb16bcff2ef

  @b{branch} "nl.xs4all.ironhead.emacs-monotone"
@b{database} "/home/woudshoo/monotone/configuration.db"
     @b{key} ""

Working copy based on head, and there are @b{pending} changes

edited:                0    added:                 1    unknown:   16
renamed-and-edited:    0    added-and-missing:     0    ignored:    3
renamed:               0    dropped:               0
unchanged:             2    missing:               0    TOTAL:     22

Currently displaying (added added-and-missing dropped edited renamed missing)


       @b{added}  e-monotone.texi
@end example
@end cartouche

Now there a few sections in in the screen,
the first two lines indicate on which revision our current source is based,
and what the monotone-database thinks the most up to date revisions are.
In this case, they are equal, so we are working on the head revision.
This information is also displayed in the 8-th line, which is the summary line.
The summary line displays the most important information, in the example it is
@example
Working copy based on head, and there are @b{pending} changes
@end example
and here we can see that we are based on head, so committing
will not create an additional head and there are local changes.

Just above the summary line we have some general information,
the branch we work on, the database that is used and the default
key that is used.  Actually it is just the content of the @file{MT/options} file.

Below the summary line we display some statistics of the project.  
Here we see that the project contains 22 files, of which 19 are not 
under version control (the unknown and the ignored files) one is newly added,
and 2 are already under version control but not changed.

Below the statistics section we see the file listing.  
In this example it shows only one file, the newly added @file{e-monotone.texi} file.
It shows only one file, because the file listing is filtered.  At the moment
it shows only interesting files.  The buffer explains which files are displayed
by the line:
@example
Currently displaying (added added-and-missing dropped edited renamed missing)
@end example
So it does display the added file, but not the 16 unknown and not the 3 ignored files.

@subsection Filtering

As seen in this example, the list of files is filtered.  When @kbd{M-x monotone-examine} is
invoked it starts with displaying only the interesting files.  The interesting files
are files which according to monotone have one of the following states
@code{added, dropped, renamed, edited, missing, added-and-missing}.  
This is done to avoid cluttering the buffer all the uninteresting files. 
However it is very easy to change the filtering.  If you want to see all
files just press the key @kbd{a} for all and you will see all files listed, in this case 22.
Pressing @kbd{i} will bring you back to the list of interesting files.
There is one other predefined filter, accessed by @kbd{k}, the known file list.  This
displays all files that are under version control.

It is also possible to show/hide per category.
@table @kbd
@item sa
Toggles the display of the added files
@item sd
Toggle the display of dropped files     
@item si
Toggles the display of ignored files
@item sm
Toggle the display of missing files
@item se
Toggle the display of edited files
@item su
Toggle the display of unchanged files
@item sr
Toggle the display of renamed files
@item s?
Toggle the display of unknown files
@end table


@subsection Examining files

When the cursor is positioned on file line the @kbd{@key{RET}} will open this
file in a new buffer.  
If the file was edited you can use the @kbd{=} key to open a buffer
containing the difference between the current content and the content
of the file as it was when this version was checked out.

@subsection Reverting

After you have carefully considered the output of @kbd{=} and decide
that you do not want this change, for example because you have only
added temporary debugging statement, you can use @kbd{U} in the monotone
buffer, with the cursor on the line of the file, to revert this file back
to the original state.  


@subsection Adding/Dropping

In the monotone buffer the keys @kbd{A} and @kbd{D} can be used to add respectively
drop files from monotone.

@section Committing

Finally we want to commit.  By pressing @kbd{C} a buffer is opened that
contains a description of all the changes that are being committing.  
All the lines in this buffer start with @code{MT:}.  Just before the actual
commit takes place all the lines starting with @code{MT:} are removed and the
text that is left is used as the commit message.
The user initiates the commit by pressing @kbd{C-c C-c} in the commit buffer.
So normally you press @kbd{C} in the monotone buffer, add some lines in the
commit buffer and finish it off with @kbd{C-c C-c}. 
If at any time you want to remove the comment lines, you can do that by
@kbd{C-c C-r}.  If you do not want to see these lines at all you should
start by using @kbd{c} instead of @kbd{C}.  Using the lowercase version
is equivalent with the capital version except that the commit buffer starts
out empty.


@node Advanced Uses, Revision diagrams, Using e-monotone, Top
@chapter Advanced Uses

@menu
* Marking::
* Difference revision::
* Annotate::
@end menu

@node Marking, Difference revision, Advanced Uses, Advanced Uses
@section Marking

In the monotone buffer you can mark files by pressing @kbd{m} and
unmark them with @kbd{u}.  After marking the commands that
normally work on a single file will work on the marked collection.
This allows you to Add, Delete, Revert or Commit only a selected 
number of files.

Note that marking and displaying are independent.
So it is possible to have a lot of marked files and
not see them flagged in the monotone buffer.
Fortunately e-monotone will ask for confirmation when operating
on the marked files.

The key @kbd{M-u} will unmark all marked files.


@node Difference revision, Annotate, Marking, Advanced Uses
@section Diffing revisions

Pressing @kbd{=} on the revision ids in the top of the buffer will
present a diff between that revision and your working copy.

@node Annotate,  , Difference revision, Advanced Uses
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Annotate

Presssing @kbd{t} in the monotone buffer on a line containing a file
will show the annotated version.  

The annotated file is by default displayed with on the left hand side
a shortened revision hash and on the right hand side the content of the file.

The display can be changed in several ways, 
@table @kbd
@item ss
Shows the shortened revision hashes, this is the default.
@item sf
Show the full length revision hash.
@item sa
Show the value of the author certificate
@item sd
Show the value of the date certificate
@end table

Furthermore, the way the lines are coloured can be changed,
the default is to more or less assign a random colour
to a revision. By key sequence @kbd{cd} will colour the revisions
by date.  Pressing @kbd{cr} will revert to the random colouring
of revisions.

@node Revision diagrams, BUGS, Advanced Uses, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Revision diagrams

In the monotone and annotate buffer pressing @kbd{W} show
a revision graph rendered by @command{dot}.

@section Revision graphs

A monotone database typically holds hundredths or thousands of revisions,
so a displaying a complete revision graph is a bit useless.  
The graph needs to be reduced to a managable size.

A simple way of reducing the graph is to pick an interesting node,
like the current revision, and only show a small neighborhood
of this node.

This is of course not the only way to reduce a graph, but
to keep it managable in monotone all graphs displayed are limited
by the number of nodes displayed.   The numebr of nodes that is displayed
is increased by the @kbd{+} key and reduced by the @kbd{-}.  Because
the image displayed has a fixed size this will result in some kind
of zooming effect. 

@section Configuration

There are two important variables that you can configure for the displaying
of the revision graphs, 

@table @code
@item monotone-preffered-branches 
This variable contains a list of regular expressions.  
These expressions are used when a revision has multiple branch certificates.
If a revision has multiple branch certificates and one of branch names
matches one of the regular expressions in the preffered-branches variables
it will assume the matched branch name for coloring.
@item monotone-wami-node-displayed-certs
This variable determines which certificates are displayed in the diagrams.
It is a list of certificate names to display.  A list element is either
a string, in which case the value is displayed as such, or a cons pair.
The first element of the cons pair is a certifacte name and the second
element a functions which takes as argument the branch value and
returns the string to display instead.
@end table


@section Types of revision graphs

Beside just taking a number of neighbouring nodes e-monotone has
the ability to modify the displayed graph in interesting ways.

@subsection Reduced display

A basic reduction step is to remove all nodes that have exactly
one parent and exactly one child.  
Removing these nodes will leave the topology of the graph intact
and allow you to display more of the neighbourhood of the interesting
node than otherwise would be the case.  The displayed graph will
display the edge that previously contained the node blue, so
you have an indication that some revisions are ommited along the blue arc.

@subsection Branch crossings

This reduction steps try to display the interaction between branches
by mostly ignoring what happens inside a branch.  The reduction tries
to remove as many nodes as possible, only keeping those  
who either have a parent in a different branch or a child in a different branch.
Also in order to keep an overview, head nodes and root nodes are not deleted.

@subsection Incoming branches

This concentrates on what is merged in from other branches in the
current branch.  Here current branch is determined by which branch the
intereseting revision belongs to.  The nodes that are kept are 
the nodes in the current branch who have a parent in a different branch.
Also nodes in a branch different from the current branch who have
a child in the current branch are kept.  As usual the heads and root
node of the current branch are not discarded.

@subsection Major branch crossings

This needs to be documented and made configurable.

@subsection Annotate display

If the graph is generated from the annotate buffer the graph displayed
will display the current revision plus all revisions that are mentioned
in the annotate buffer.  


@node BUGS, TODO, Revision diagrams, Top
@chapter BUGS

There a plenty bugs I know of,
@itemize 
@item
Cursor position is not well maintained when buffer is redisplayed
@item
Lots of file states are not handled correctly, for example renaming
@item
Font lock coloring of the commit buffer is wrong
@item
After add/drop/revert the file status displayed may be incorrect.
Work around, regenerate with @kbd{g}
@item
Many many more
@end itemize


@node TODO,  , BUGS, Top
@chapter TODO

A lot :-)



@bye
